Now, this word picture
of someone being stumbled
is quite vivid, isn’t it?
We’ve all seen someone stumbled.
In fact, we’ve all stumbled
ourselves at times,
and there are varying degrees
of consequences.
For example,
a person can stumble,
quickly recover,
and continue
almost uneventfully down the path.
Or a person can stumble,
fall, break a bone,
eventually they recover
—but only after extensive therapy.
Then again, a person can stumble,
fall, hit his head,
never recover
—becoming a casualty.
Well, the situation is similar
when one is stumbled spiritually.
He can recover quickly,
maybe recover over time,
or he may never recover
—becoming a spiritual casualty.
So we cannot know
the ultimate outcome
for someone who is stumbled.
So no wonder we’re cautioned
to be very careful
to never be any cause
for stumbling.
Open up
to Matthew chapter 18,
and here’s
an especially powerful scripture
in this regard.
Matthew 18:6, Jesus says:
“But whoever stumbles
one of these little ones
“who have faith in me,
“it would be better for him
to have hung around his neck
“a millstone
that is turned by a donkey
and to be sunk in the open sea.”
Well, with graphic language,
Jesus describes
how that if we cause someone
to become a spiritual casualty,
we could actually bring
eternal doom
upon ourselves.
But now, here’s a question,
What could we do
to cause someone to stumble?
Well, interestingly,
there are several similarities
between causing someone
to stumble physically
and causing someone
to stumble spiritually.
Let us discuss three.
Now one, pushing someone
could cause them to stumble,
especially if they’re on uneven terrain,
if you think about it.
And this is true
physically and spiritually.
But think about Jehovah
for a moment.
He could push any of us,
couldn’t he?
He could force us to serve him.
He certainly has the power,
but he never uses it that way.
Instead, he invites, he encourages;
and he explains the blessings,
the curses,
depending upon how we decide.
But it’s up to us, isn’t it?
For example, at Isaiah 48:18,
Jehovah says: ‘If only
‘you would pay attention
to my commandments!
‘Then your peace
would become like a river
and your righteousness
like the waves of the sea.’
Beseeching, but not forcing.
Now think about it,
if Jehovah doesn’t force,
he doesn’t want us
to force either, does he?
For example, parents
need to be very careful
they don’t just simply push
their children to serve Jehovah.
But rather, lovingly,
beseechingly like Jehovah,
try to reach the heart,
and of course,
clearly show them the blessings
that will come their way
if they do.
Another example,
elders should never try
to push Jehovah’s sheep.
I heard an experience
about an elder, during his part,
asked the brothers
for a show of hands
how many were going out in service
the next morning.
Well, only a few raised their hand.
He proceeded
to scold the congregation
that more should be going out.
Well, he then unwisely asked
for another show of hands.
You guessed it
—fewer raised their hand
the second time.
Take another example,
those who conduct Bible studies
should not just try to push
their students to do the right thing.
“You’ve got to quit smoking!
You’ve got to get rid of those idols!”
No, not with external pressure,
but by motivating their hearts,
you motivate your students.
Or take another example,
none of us
should try to push schoolmates,
workmates, or relatives
to accept the truth.
A pushing approach,
shoving approach
—even though motivated with sincerity—
has actually resulted
in people being stumbled
away from the truth
for many years.
It makes me think of the story,
or the saying,
that when a person
first learns the truth,
you should lock them up
for about six months
to contain, or minimize,
the damage they do.
Well, that saying is totally erroneous.
You shouldn’t lock that brother up;
you should follow that brother.
See, that brother has zeal,
doesn’t he?
But it’s true,
we probably do need to help him
to properly channel that zeal,
so that he doesn’t try
to force his relatives
or others to accept the truth
that he is so excited about.
But now, what is the second thing
we can do to cause someone
to stumble?
Placing an obstacle in their path.
Now again, this is true
physically or spiritually.
And if you think about it,
whether we put
that stumbling block there intentionally
or unintentionally,
the result is the same, isn’t it?
As mentioned
in today’s Watchtower comments,
wholesome speech and upright conduct
can help us to avoid
ever being a cause for stumbling.
In contrast, unwholesome speech,
unclean conduct,
can easily stumble ones inside
or outside the congregation.
But now, what about in an area
where we have a Scriptural right
to do something?
Now, surely exercising that right,
if it stumbles someone,
we can’t be held accountable
for that, can we?
Well, open up
to 1 Corinthians chapter 8,
and here
—very interestingly—
this scripture
answers that question.
1 Corinthians 8:9,
it says:
“But keep watching
“that your right to choose
“does not somehow
become a stumbling block
to those who are weak.”
Isn’t that interesting?
Even our right to choose,
if it would stumble someone,
we wouldn’t exercise that right
according to this scripture.
The apostle Paul,
in verse 13 of that same chapter,
he said he
wouldn’t even eat meat ever again
if it stumbled his brother.
Well, like Paul,
are we willing
to forgo our rights regarding,
for example,
wearing a beard,
wearing heavy makeup,
using alcohol
—as just a few examples—
if exercising that right
might even possibly stumble someone?
But now,
what’s the third way
we could cause someone to stumble?
Failing to warn him
about a potential trip hazard.
We could call this
the sin of omission.
And again,
it applies physically and spiritually.
As a physical example,
let’s say we see the floor
has just been mopped,
and an unsuspecting person
is approaching that wet area.
Now will we warn them?
If we don’t warn them
—they fall, hurt themselves—
would we not share
some responsibility?
Well, similarly,
with spiritual application,
Galatians 6:1 tells us
that if someone “takes a false step”
before he’s aware of it,
what are we supposed
to try to do?
“Try to readjust” such a person,
but then it adds:
“In a spirit of mildness.”
Don’t push him!
But try to gently, lovingly warn
and readjust that person.
So there we have three areas
in which we must be careful
we never contribute
toward someone being stumbled.
We don’t push others
to serve Jehovah.
We strive to never,
even unintentionally,
put a stumbling block in their path
—for example—
by insisting on exercising
our personal rights.
And number three,
we never fail to lovingly warn
one whom we see approaching
a potential trip hazard.
Rather than being
any cause for stumbling,
we want to be
a force for good, don’t we?
Helping others to stand firm
and even helping ones get up
if they have fallen.